[THEME MUSIC]
>>RIZWAN VIRK: Someday
we'll be able to create
a video game that's
indistinguishable
from physical reality.
>>GEORGE NOORY: Interesting.
>>VIRK: And so
it's very possible
that something similar is going
on in the world around us.
>>NOORY: Who is the
creator of the simulation?
>>VIRK: Some people
say it's aliens.
It's future versions
of ourselves.
There are others who say it's
God or pure consciousness.
>>NOORY: Is it kind
of sad to think
we're living in a simulation?
>>VIRK: We can look at
the challenges in life
and realize that
perhaps we set up
those challenges for
ourselves as ways for us
to level up the soul.
If any civilization
anywhere in the galaxy ever
reaches the point of
creating simulations,
then you and I are more likely
in a simulation than not.
>>NOORY: Well, welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
And you're going to hear a story
tonight on the program that
is just going to make
you go, "Oh my gosh."
Rizwan Virk is a successful
entrepreneur, investor,
video game industry pioneer,
independent film producer,
and best-selling author.
In his latest book, "The
Simulation Hypothesis,"
an MIT computer scientist shows
why artificial intelligence,
quantum physics,
and Eastern mystics
agree that we are
living in a video game.
And you believe this, don't you?
>>VIRK: Yeah, well, I believe
it's more likely than not.
And based on my experience
and how we build video games,
I started to investigate the
weirdness of quantum physics.
And I realized that
there's no good explanation
for some of that weirdness.
But it turns out
within video games,
we render the world
just as you need it.
And that's why we're able to
build entire video game 3D
worlds, like "World of Warcraft"
or "Fortnite" or "The Sims."
And so it's very possible that
something similar is going
on in the world around us.
>>NOORY: Riz, Elon
Musk believes we're
living in a simulated
matrix as well, doesn't he?
>>VIRK: Yeah.
And he made the point
that 40 years ago, we
had "Pong," which was the first
commercially available video
game.
>>NOORY: I used
to play that game.
>>VIRK: Yeah, it was just
two squares and a dot.
>>NOORY: Boop, boop, boop, boop.
>>VIRK: And today we
have virtual reality
and augmented reality.
And the reason I got
interested in this whole idea
of the simulation was
related to "Pong."
I was actually playing ping
pong in virtual reality.
So I put on the
headset and I started
playing this ping pong game.
And at the end I forgot I was
in a virtual reality game.
So I tried to put the
paddle down on the table
and lean against the table,
but there was no table.
Just like there's no
spoon in the movie
"The Matrix," that's
when I realized
that our technology was getting
good enough that someday we'll
be able to create
a video game that's
indistinguishable
from physical reality.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>VIRK: And I call that
the simulation point, which
we're on track to get to.
>>NOORY: Who is the
creator of the simulation?
>>VIRK: Well, that's the
big $64 million question.
Some people say it's aliens.
There was a professor
at Oxford who
wrote a paper about this back
in 2003 named Nick Bostrom.
And he thinks it's future
versions of ourselves.
So he thinks we're in what we'd
call an ancestor simulation.
Like if we created a
game of ancient Rome,
they would be like our
ancestors in a way.
There are others who say it's
God or pure consciousness,
outside of the matrix.
So all the religions, not
just any specific religion,
but pretty much all of
them have been telling us
that the physical world
is not the real world,
that there's another world
out there beyond this.
And so that's yet another
theory of what's outside.
>>NOORY: Do you believe
this is probable, possible?
>>VIRK: I believe it's probable,
like more than a 50% chance
that we are inside
some type of--
>>NOORY: Those are
pretty high odds.
>>VIRK: Well, yeah.
And as I studied the
different religions,
I realized that
they were telling us
the same thing that
modern computer
science and that modern
physics is starting to tell us
about the nature of reality.
>>NOORY: What if somebody or
something shut this game off
instantly?
What would happen to us?
>>VIRK: Well, this
depends a little bit
on what I call the NPC
version or the RPG version.
So NPC means
non-player character.
And those are the characters
inside the video games
that are just AI--
the bank teller or
the bartender or the
orcs that you're fighting.
And then there's the RPG
version or the role-playing game
version.
Those are the
characters that we play.
So if you and I
were in a game, we
would have avatars
within the game.
And so what happens
when you shut down
a game if you're playing,
like "World of Warcraft,"
or if you had a virtual
reality headset on?
You take off the headset
and there's still
you outside of the game.
But the problem is in something
like "The Matrix," if you
remember, Keanu Reeves and
Morpheus and the others,
they had those
wires that connected
into the back of their brain.
So they forgot that they
were inside a video game.
They didn't realize it.
Now, on the other hand, if we're
just non-player characters,
if we're just AI within the
game and you shut off the game,
then those characters
go to sleep until you
can restart those again.
>>NOORY: Interesting take.
Now, Elon Musk is
working on neurolinks.
He wants us all to have
computer chips in our brains.
>>VIRK: That's right.
So in my book, I lay out
the 10 stages of technology
that we would need to
develop to build something
like "The Matrix" or reach what
I call the simulation point.
And stage seven is brain
computer interfaces,
which is what Elon Musk--
>>NOORY: Here we are.
>>VIRK: --is working on.
So if you saw the video, he
was able to teach a monkey
to play a video game
using a joystick.
Then they disconnected
the joystick
and they just read the
monkey's brain signals as he
moved this joystick around.
And using the brain
signals, he was
able to play the same game
we've been talking about,
"Pong," with the two
squares and the dot.
And so we're getting
better at being
able to read our brain signals.
But we can't write
to the brain yet.
So we can't do what they did
in "The Matrix" just yet.
>>NOORY: What are
quantum physicists saying
about theories like this?
>>VIRK: Well, quantum physics
has one or two major mysteries,
one of which is called quantum
indeterminacy or the observer
effect.
And the best way
to explain it is
the idea of Schrodinger's cat.
And there's this
cat who's in a box.
And he has a 50% chance of
being alive after an hour
and a 50% chance of being dead.
Now, we would say, common
sense tells us the cat is alive
or the cat is dead.
It can't be both.
And when you open it up, we'll
find out which one was true
and the other one wasn't true.
But what quantum physicists
tell us is that's not right.
The cat is both alive and dead--
>>NOORY: --at the same time.
>>VIRK: --at the same time.
It's what's called a
superposition state.
It has both values until
somebody opens up the box
and looks at the cat,
until it's observed.
And so this is a mystery
that can't be explained
within quantum physics.
But as I said earlier,
this makes perfect sense
if we live inside a
video game, because if we
play a video game, I only see
what's rendered on my computer.
And you only see what's
rendered on your computer,
just like we might think
we're in the same room,
but it's just our avatars
that are in the same room.
And I can only see
what's over there
and you can only see
what's over there.
>>NOORY: What was it is that
got you thinking this way?
I mean, you just didn't
wake up one morning
and say, "We're
living in a matrix."
>>VIRK: No, it really took
the development of the physics
engines and the graphical
engines of our video games.
So I was involved in making a
bunch of games for the iPhone
back when the iPhone
first came out.
And those were not
super high resolution.
But as the engines got
better and the resolution
got to 2K, 4K, 8K resolution,
it became so good.
In fact, the resolution
is no longer the problem.
It now it's just about
how responsive is it.
And so when I was playing
ping pong in virtual reality,
it felt like I was
really hitting a ball.
But there was no ball.
So as the responsiveness
of the engines
got better, as the graphics
in video games got better,
that's what got me thinking
about how long would it
take for us to reach
the simulation point.
And that's when I started
to investigate and write
this book.
>>NOORY: Riz, researcher Linda
Moulton Howe and I had a chance
to discuss the possibilities
of ancient religions
and how they
figured out if we're
living in a simulated universe.
Let's watch.
>>LINDA MOULTON HOWE:
Professor Campbell
thinks that this universe was
made to be an entropy reduction
trainer for souls.
And when we were
talking about that,
I was thinking of Gnosticism
and Zoroastrianism, which goes
back more than 2,000 years.
>>NOORY: I'm glad you're
pronouncing these words.
>>MOULTON HOWE:
Well, I tell you,
I recommend to everybody to
read about Zoroastrianism
and Gnosticism,
because in many ways
it may be the key to
why anybody simulated
this universe in
the first place.
And the idea is that this,
when you have entropy,
it's energy winding down.
It's why this would be a
universe where death is the end
of everything-- stars,
people, the universe--
but that there could
be many universes where
time, the vector of
time goes to the past.
And that means there
would never be death.
There would be universes
of immortality.
Why then would this be
an entropy reduction
trainer for souls?
And he's talking as a physicist.
He says, I really do think that
what we are underestimating
is the importance
of the soul, spirit
as the whole key to everything
that is on this planet.
>>NOORY: Sounds biblical.
>>MOULTON HOWE: Well, it has
to do with the life force.
If, in fact, the
body containers,
whether we're talking
about ETs, humans,
anything that is organic
life in this universe,
there is a life force.
And in the first law of
thermodynamics that physicists
live by, energy
cannot be destroyed.
It is always there reforming.
So the soul, spirit
of any entity
would be the consciousness
relationship to the projector.
Now we're getting into
the minds of any creature
in this universe would be the
inner actor with the projector,
and that the body
containers are what
would take the soul and spirit
around in this universe.
But the whole point, the
bottom line to everything
is trying to live with
compassion, with love,
with sharing, not hate
and greed and jealousy,
and that the more jealousy,
the more hate, the more
war, the faster the universe
runs down with entropy.
>>NOORY: If we're living
in a simulated universe,
Riz, why do we feel pain?
Why do we have emotion?
>>VIRK: Well, some
people will say
that if they were to design
the universe as a simulation,
they wouldn't have
any of those things.
The problem is, if you remember
in the second and third
"Matrix" movie, they revealed
that the first version
of the matrix was
one where everything
was peaceful and blissful,
and the human mind
didn't accept that
as a full reality.
And so it turns out we may
need some element of struggle,
just like in an "Indiana
Jones" movie, right?
If Indy Jones just got
the map at the beginning
and said, here's the Ark
of the Covenant, go get it,
well, that doesn't make for
a very interesting movie.
And so when we
design video games,
we have to create levels
and achievements and quests
in increasing difficulty.
And so the pain and
the disappointments
and the suffering that are
there are built into the game,
I believe, as
obstacles or challenges
for us to overcome
as we level up.
>>NOORY: How does science
contribute to this possibility
that we're in a matrix?
>>VIRK: Well, science is
about discovering the rules
of the physical universe.
But the problem is
when science looks
for this thing
called matter, right,
it's like opening up
those Russian dolls.
They can't find matter.
>>NOORY: There's one
inside of another and--
>>VIRK: Yeah, and they just
keep finding empty space.
And at the bottom
level, turns out
what physicists are telling us
is that it's all information.
So there was a famous physicist
named John Wheeler, who
was one of the last guys who
worked with Einstein and Niels
Bohr, the fathers
of quantum physics.
And he said that
in his lifetime,
physics went from everything
must be a particle,
like a solid ball, to
everything must be a field,
like a magnetic field, to
everything is information.
And so he coined a phrase
called "it from bit."
And so if you have an
it, like this chair,
it's a physical object, but
it's really composed of bits.
So at the bottom level, the
only thing they could find
were a bunch of questions,
yes-no questions.
And what does that sound like?
It sounds like computer bits.
And so even science is
turning towards this idea
of digital physics, which is
that the physical world is
one of information.
And now we just saw that
video where Linda Moulton Howe
discussed the entropy
and the second--
and the laws of thermodynamics.
But there's a new
type of entropy,
which is information entropy
and conservation of information,
that you can't
destroy information.
And so even physics
itself, which
used to be about
the material world,
is evolving to be about
the information that
can be contained in
the physical world.
>>NOORY: Can we
control the outcome
of this video game we're in?
>>VIRK: Well, it depends on
the type of game we're in.
And so if you play, say,
Dungeons and Dragons,
like I used to play when I was
a kid, you choose a character
and you choose the attributes--
the height, the strength,
the agility, and the profession.
And then you decide
that you're going to go
on a campaign or a story arc.
And so within that
story arc, you
can make all the
decisions along the way.
But I believe that
each of us comes here
with certain
achievements or quests,
like, for example, I knew I was
always going to be a computer
software entrepreneur.
If you had asked
me in high school,
I said I'm going to be
a software entrepreneur
and then I'm going
to be a writer.
Now, how did I know that
when I was 12 or 13?
Well, it was just one of
those things that I knew.
And so each of us is
drawn to different areas,
different professions,
different people.
And I believe that
those things are part
of our plan or our story arc.
But we have the freedom
to choose on the way
where we end up.
>>NOORY: How would you
build, Riz, this matrix,
starting from scratch?
>>VIRK: Well, if I were
to build this matrix,
I would think about
the physical world.
And then I would think
about the characters
that we are going to have
and what kinds of challenges
those characters might have.
Now, this is why suffering
and pain are included.
Now, if we were in a game like
"Grand Theft Auto," right,
everyone would be trying
to steal each other's cars
and kill each other.
And that's one type of game.
I don't believe that's the
type of game that we're in
or the type of game that I would
design, that we are in a game
where each of us has a
difficulty level and each of us
has to overcome that.
And then I'd figure out, how
do we store the information
about that game?
And in Silicon Valley,
we say that information
is stored in the cloud,
which, of course, sounds
like a religious thing.
But it's really how we
store information these days
in machines that can't be seen.
You don't know where they are.
They're somewhere outside of
what you can see on the screen.
And so then you'd need a
way to download information
from the player of the
game into the avatar.
And if you look at
the ancient religions,
they've basically been telling
us, you download into a body.
You live that life.
You have a story line.
You die.
Then all of your deeds
get recorded along the way
and that you have
to review those.
And people who've had near-death
experiences, like Dannion
Brinkley and
others, have told us
they saw a holographic 360
panoramic life review, which
means every single moment
of their lives is replayed
and they can re-experience it.
Well, it turns out we can
do this in virtual reality.
We can record, if you're playing
a game like "World of Warcraft"
or "League of Legends"
or "Fortnite,"
we can record the entire game.
Kids do it all the time and
they stream it on Twitch.
But we can replay it from
different coordinates.
So you can be your opponent.
You could be one of your
guild mates, for example.
And you can see it
from any point of view.
And so if these things called
life reviews actually happen,
then someone has to be
recording the information.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>VIRK: And so that's why if
I were to design the game,
I'd think about the information
architecture of this world.
And that's why I think
physics is starting
to realize that the world
is really about information
and not physical objects.
>>NOORY: Who came
up with the concept
that we could be
living in a simulation?
>>VIRK: Well, it's
a very old idea,
going back to Plato's
cave, 2,000 years ago,
and the Hindu Vedas,
which are 5,000 years old,
and the idea of
maya or illusion.
But in modern times, in 1977,
the science fiction writer
Philip K. Dick gave a speech--
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>VIRK: --at the Metz
Sci-Fi convention in France.
And he said we are living in
a computer programmed reality.
And the only clue we have is
when some variable is altered,
some change in our
reality occurs.
After that in 1999, you had
"The Matrix" and "The Thirteenth
Floor" and other
fiction like that.
But it was really Oxford
philosophy Professor Nick
Bostrom who came
out with a paper
in 2003, saying are you living
in a computer simulation?
And he came up with something
called the simulation argument.
And the simulation argument
says either a society will get
to this point that we've talked
about, the simulation point,
where we can create matrix-like
simulations, or it won't.
And if it does, it will create
lots of simulations, millions
of them, because all you need
to do is fire up another server.
And so if there are
millions of simulated worlds
and there's only
one base reality
and we happen to be in a
world, which is more likely?
We're in one of these
or one of those.
And so its basic idea was
that if any civilization
anywhere in the
galaxy ever reaches
the point of
creating simulations,
then you and I are more likely
in a simulation than not.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
What do parallel universes
have to do with this puzzle?
>>VIRK: Well, Ralph Waldo
Emerson I think once
said that it's no more
surprising that we
live multiple times
than that we live once.
And so when I interviewed Philip
K. Dick's wife for my book,
she said he believed there were
multiple timelines going on,
and that all the people who
ran the simulation had to do
was change a
variable and it would
generate a new run of the
simulation, if you will.
And he believed that
we had a run where
the Axis powers, Germany
and Japan, won World War II.
And he wrote his novel, "The
Man in the High Castle," which
became a very popular--
>>NOORY: That was a great book.
>>VIRK: --TV series
on Amazon recently,
and because he had memories
of this other timeline.
And so I would say if we
could be in one simulation,
then it wouldn't at
all be surprising
if we couldn't run multiple
simulations on the same server,
because that's what we do.
If we're running a
simulation on the weather,
we don't run one simulation.
We run hundreds of
different simulations.
And so multiverse is
very hard to explain
from a physical point of view.
But quantum physicists
say it's another solution
to the observer effect
or the observer problem
that we talked
about earlier, which
means that every choice is
made generates a new universe.
In one the cat is alive and
in the other the cat is dead.
Well, there's nothing in
nature that can clone itself.
The planet Earth doesn't clone
itself and create a new planet.
It takes a billion years
for a new planet to form.
But what can be cloned in
an instant is information.
And every single
computer processor
that's out there today
can take a bunch of bits
and clone them very quickly.
So if there are
multiple universes,
it's more likely that
they are information
or probable universes
than physical universes.
And then all we have
to do to see what's
going on in any of
them is render them
on our computer
screen, in the same way
that you and I happen
to be rendering
this particular universe or
this particular timeline.
And that's actually the
subject of my next book, which
is called "The Simulated
Multiverse," which
is about this idea
that we don't just
live in the single
simulation, but we
may have run the simulation.
And that's why we
experience certain things,
like deja vu, where we think
we might have done this
once before.
>>NOORY: Another time.
Exactly.
On Gaia's "Mystery
Teachings" show,
physicist Dr.
Theresa Bullard talks
about why so many
physicists resist
the idea of multiple universes.
>>THERESA BULLARD:
And that string theory
provides some exciting and
beautiful possibilities
for discovering a unified
theory of everything.
And string theory is
what has opened the door
to the multiverse
idea in science.
How did it do that?
Well, it goes back to the
issue that string theorists are
grappling with, the challenge of
identifying the exact geometry
of the super strings
and extra dimensions
hidden within our universe.
They have many candidate
shapes allowed by the math,
over 10 to the power of
500 possibilities, which
is a massive number, each
geometry theoretically
corresponding to its own
universe with a different set
of physical laws and tuning.
But rather than saying there
can be only one right answer
resulting in only
one universe, namely
ours, string
theorists have instead
proposed that all of
these possibilities
are equally probable and
likely exist somewhere
within a multiverse, meaning
there are at least 10
to the power 500
differently tuned
universes out there in
the multiverse, maybe even
infinite numbers.
But this part, where they say
they're all equally probable
and all exist, this is the
part where some scientists then
claim that this
means that there is
nothing special about the
fine tuning of our universe.
We simply find these sets of
parameters in our universe
because we can only
exist in a universe that
is fine-tuned for life.
But there are many other types
of universes in the multiverse.
We are just one possibility
in an infinite sea, nothing
special.
Therefore, mystery
solved, or not.
Really, all of this
is speculation based
on assumptions, not evidence.
>>NOORY: Riz, what you
just said of deja vu
emitting from multiverses
makes a lot of sense.
>>VIRK: Yeah, and, in fact, I
mentioned the science fiction
writer Philip K. Dick.
And he made that point,
that he felt like every time
they ran the simulation, they
would rewind it and redo it.
And in one instance, he
believed that they prevented
JFK's assassination
in Dallas, but then he
got assassinated in
Orlando or in another city.
>>NOORY: In another city.
>>VIRK: And so they kept going
and they didn't find an outcome
that they liked.
So they went back
to the timeline
where he was
assassinated in Dallas.
And so this starts to
explain lots of things
about why we think
we might know what's
going to happen in the
future and we have hunches
and intuition, is that we
are inside this multiple set
of universes.
It also explains fine-tuning,
as we saw in the video,
because no one knows why the
parameters in our universe
are just right for life.
If it was changed
just a little bit,
the planets would fall apart.
The galaxies would fall apart.
Well, it turns out when we
run computer simulations,
we run many
different simulations
and we pick the ones that
are most appropriate.
So if you think of a giant
tree going to infinity,
we prune the tree and then
we merge those possibilities.
And we go forward with the
most interesting possibilities.
And so that provides a much
better theoretical framework
for how fine-tuning might work.
>>NOORY: If we are not
living in a simulation,
what are we living in?
What is this?
>>VIRK: Well, if we're not
living in a simulation,
we have to be living
in a material world.
And there's nothing outside
of the material world.
But then all kinds of things,
including ESP, telepathy,
near-death experiences, the
afterlife, many of these things
can't exist in a
material universe.
And that's the dominant
scientific paradigm,
which is why many scientists
resist the idea that any
of these topics, which
you explore in your show,
would really exist.
In fact, I've had
scientists tell me
that they used to be
atheists, but after thinking
about the simulation hypothesis,
now they're agnostic,
because to us, anyone who's
outside of the simulation
would seem to be like
an angel or a god
or, as we would call it,
super-users or programmers
in computer speak.
>>NOORY: Is it kind
of sad to think
we're living in a simulation?
It's got a lonely feeling to it.
>>VIRK: It does, but it depends
on the type of simulation.
Again, if we were all
just random NPCs--
like there's a new movie
this year called "Free Guy"
with Ryan Reynolds
where he's just an NPC,
and when they turn
off the simulation,
he just kind of disappears.
But if we are players
with characters,
then we can look at
the challenges in life
and realize that perhaps
we set up those challenges
for ourselves as ways for us to
level up the soul, if you will.
So the part of us that exists
outside the physical universe
that we've forgotten about
actually is still watching us
and is helping us to
make the choices that
might lead us a certain way.
So there's a comfort in
it, because as you said,
inevitably life comes
with suffering and pain
and challenges.
Now, if we say those are just
random and meaningless pain
and random,
meaningless challenges,
well, that's kind of sad, too.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>VIRK: On the other hand,
if we're in a simulation,
we set up those
challenges for ourselves
as things we can overcome.
And so it gives us
more confidence to say,
OK, I'm going to
get through this
because this is what I set up
for myself despite how hard it
is.
And my player wanted
to get a level up,
so he made it really
difficult for me, perhaps.
That's one way to
think about it.
>>NOORY: What is the
downside, the downside
if we're in a simulation?
>>VIRK: Well, the downside
is if people say, well,
nothing I do here matters
because it's a simulation,
right?
So what the simulation
hypothesis tells us is this
may not be the
real world, but it
doesn't mean that
what we're seeing
isn't real within the world.
So while we're here, we
have to take this universe
as a real universe, not just
as a simulated universe.
Otherwise, people would
start to do crazy things
and use what's called the
"Matrix" defense, which
is a legal defense that
was used by some kid who
killed his parents
and said, well, I
thought I was in a matrix.
So you get the kind
of people who think--
>>NOORY: But he didn't
get away with it.
>>VIRK: He didn't
get away with it, no.
So I don't know that
it's ever actually
been used successfully.
But that's the downside of
going too far down that path.
And that works if you're
in the NPC version,
if it were just meaningless
non-player characters.
So it's important to think
about the type of game
we're living in.
And if we're here to be
compassionate towards one
another and we're here
to get over challenges,
then that's a very
different type
of game than being here
to kill each other.
>>NOORY: Now here's a
new ingredient, mystics
and how they view, of course,
the nature of reality.
Scientist Gregg Braden talks
about that on our show "Missing
Links."
>>GREGG BRADEN: Let's
go back and look
at what our most ancient and
cherished spiritual traditions
from a number of
different religions
tell us about the
world that we live in.
They tell us almost universally
that our world has a beginning.
And there are different ideas
about what that beginning is.
But there is a clear beginning
in every religious tradition,
and that our world will have
an end, that it does not
continue forever.
That is almost a universal
truth throughout the religions,
and that the events
that are unfolding
between that
beginning and that end
are based on natural
rhythms and cycles.
Our most cherished
spiritual traditions tell us
that every life has a
beginning and every life
must have an end.
They are not perpetual.
They tell us that there are
rules to living in this world
and that our lives will get
better as we learn those rules.
Now, there are different
interpretations
of those rules in
different traditions.
Some of them are as
common as the golden rule,
do unto others as you'd
have them do unto you.
Some of them are reflected
in the Ten Commandments
that tell us about how
to conduct our lives.
And in other
spiritual traditions,
in the shamanic traditions
and in the Egyptian mystical
traditions, they
all give us insights
into how we live our
lives in this world.
And here's the key.
Every ancient
spiritual tradition
tells us that beyond the
world of our everyday senses
that we have direct access to
a guidance and the wisdom that
is not part of this world.
We have access to an external
reality or an external guide.
So when we make
these comparisons,
except for the language, you
can see the similarities.
Is it possible that
thousands of years
ago, our ancestors were
trying to inform us
in a language of
their time something
that they understood, that we
are only beginning to awaken
to the possibility of
happening in our lives,
that we are actually
in an artificial world,
a temporary world that has
a beginning and an end,
that we're learning
something here,
and that we have access to
an external guidance when
we need that access?
We can't tell the real
from the illusion.
And as a matter of fact,
the Sanskrit word "maya,"
the word itself, "maya,"
actually means illusion.
This is a fundamental concept
in the Hindu tradition.
And what I love about the Hindu
tradition is that they tell us
that it is under the illusion,
under maya's influence that
the soul identifies
with the body,
to the point where we cannot
tell ourselves as separate from
the illusion of
this physical world.
Under maya's
influence, we get lost
in the body's expressions
of ego and fear, sex, race,
the color of our skin,
our belief systems.
It's under the illusion of maya.
And where this
gets really, really
interesting is in
those same traditions,
the idea of enlightenment
means to escape the maya,
to escape the illusion.
>>NOORY: Riz, he's pretty
profound, isn't he?
>>VIRK: Yeah, absolutely.
And I wholeheartedly
agree that what
all the ancient religions
have been telling
us is two main points.
The first is that the
universe that we see
is not the real world.
And the Hindus say maya.
Within the Buddhist
traditions, they often
used the metaphor of a
dream, and that we've
forgotten about the real world.
In the Greek
traditions, they talk
about we cross the
river of forgetfulness
when we incarnate.
So we forget what
was there before,
which is very similar
to this process of being
in something like a matrix.
The second thing they all tell
us is that our actions matter.
And how we treat other
people within the game,
that's how we keep score.
In the Islamic
traditions, there's
the idea of the Scroll of Deeds.
And in the Christian traditions,
there's the Book of Life
and the Book of Deeds.
And the idea is that
they have these recording
angels who sit there and write
down everything that they do.
Now, that's a metaphor, right?
That doesn't mean
there are literally
7 billion angels or 14 billion
that are sitting there writing
on a physical book.
At that time they used
the metaphor of the book,
just as the Buddhists used
the metaphor of a dream world
and we wake up from the world.
I like to think that if any of
those guys were alive today,
they would use a
different metaphor.
Just as Shakespeare said the
world's a stage and the men
and women are merely
players on that stage,
today, they would say all the
world is an interactive video
game.
And the men and women are
just avatars in this game.
>>NOORY: Does the matrix
explain UFOs and other kinds
of phenomena like that?
>>VIRK: Yeah, it
gives us a framework
for explaining these that
makes a lot more sense
than the simple material world.
If you look at UFO
reports, there's
often a report of an object
materializing out of nowhere.
And when I wrote my book, I
interviewed Jacques Vallee,
who has been investigating this
since the days of Project Blue
Book.
And he told me that there
were two things that were odd,
out of many, in UFO reports.
In some cases, one person sees
the UFO and the person standing
next to them does
not see the UFO.
And so he believes
there's an element
of different consciousness.
Well, we do this in
video games all the time.
If you and I are sitting here
but we're really avatars,
then I'm seeing
it on my computer
and you're seeing
it on your computer.
And if I'm at level two
and you're at level 30,
you might see a UFO
materializing right here,
but I can't see it because on
my computer, it's not rendering.
So the servers make
decisions in video games
about who to render what
to based upon their level
and their challenges
and their quests.
He also said that
sometimes UFOs seem
to go through physical objects--
>>NOORY: --and disappear.
>>VIRK: --and disappear.
And in one case, he
said they went right
through the redwood trees.
Well, the trees
were still there.
So, obviously, they
didn't cut the trees.
How could the UFO have gone
through the redwood trees?
And then it became a physical
object that actually landed.
Well, if you've ever
played a video game,
you know that as you're
rendering something,
you can move through walls.
And then when it's
finally rendered,
then you have to obey the laws
of physics within the game.
But there's a period of
time where you can de-render
and you can move objects around.
And so it starts to
explain what appear
to be these absurd
aspects of UFO sightings.
>>NOORY: How does
artificial intelligence
fit into this, Riz?
>>VIRK: Well, to reach the point
where we can create something
like "The Matrix," one
of the stages I list
is that we have to be
able to create NPCs that
can pass the Turing Test,
which is a test to if you speak
to a computer or a person and
you can't tell the difference,
then you can say that computer
has passed the Turing Test.
And so AI is a way to get
characters in the video game.
Now, some people would say
that there's an AI controlling
the entire game.
And, in fact, as
we talked about,
having angels
recording our actions
doesn't make sense to have
actual angels doing it.
It would make sense
to have AI that's
running with rules that's just
recording everything, just
like we do on our servers.
In fact, they're even
called daemons, processes
that run on our servers.
And so AI can be involved
in every aspect of creating
and maintaining the
world, rather than
having to create every little
thing from the game's creators.
The game's creators
create the AIs, which
then allow us to play the game.
>>NOORY: Could the Bible
have been making reference
to the way creator who was
developing this matrix?
>>VIRK: I think so.
The Bible tells us
that in the beginning,
God says, "Let there
be light," right?
And that light
really is the essence
of the physical universe.
And so if you think
about a computer game,
you turn it on by turning
on the electricity.
What is electricity?
It's electromagnetic radiation.
This seems to be the one
constant in the universe,
is the speed of
light and the fact
that light is at the
base of everything.
And so it sounds more
like a video game
than a physical reality.
And the Bible also tells us that
our actions are being recorded
and that there are
these entities there
that are watching us and
they're there to help us.
And if we look at
the traditions which
tell us to pray, who is
it that we're praying to?
We're praying to entities
that are watching us
from outside the simulation.
If you remember
there was a movie,
"Bruce Almighty," I
think, with Jim Carrey--
>>NOORY: Jim Carrey.
>>VIRK: --where God
gave him his powers
and he just got in his computer.
He could see a list
of all the prayers
that were coming through,
right, which is maybe a better
metaphor than it first looks.
>>NOORY: Maybe it
happens that way.
>>VIRK: You never know.
All this information has
to be stored somewhere.
>>NOORY: Researcher
and author David Icke
talked about
technology that could
be mimicking our own reality.
And he said this on Gaia's
"Escape the Matrix" show.
>>DAVID ICKE: So the question
then comes, obviously--
what is all this computer-like,
virtual-reality-like encoding
doing in our reality?
Well, I say it's
because what we're
seeing with technology
as it advances
so fast now is
technology mimicking
reality, because our reality
is simulated in some way
by a form of technology.
And it's been my view
for quite a long time
now that the idea that
the speed of light
is the fastest speed
possible, though it's
become a basic tenet
of mainstream science,
I say that's a nonsense, that--
I mean, we live in
an infinite reality
that is all possibility
and all potential.
So you can't have a fastest
speed within all possibility,
because all possibility
is all possibility.
And I say that what
the speed of light is
is the limit, the firewall
of the simulation.
And so they found that when
you get closer and closer
to the speed of
light, things start
to go strange, start to act
differently, react differently.
And things that
work a certain way
within the reality
in general starts
to change when it gets
to the speed of light.
My view is that
this is happening
because it's entering
the outer limits
of this particular
simulated reality.
And therefore, it starts
to act differently.
>>NOORY: So what do
you think of that?
In a roundabout way,
he, too, is talking
about a simulated reality.
>>VIRK: Yeah, absolutely.
And he's been talking
about this for a while.
And I think we agree that
the physical world is
starting to look more and
more like information.
You've probably
heard of 3D printers.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>VIRK: And 3D printers can
be used to print an object,
even print a scale model--
>>NOORY: I'm still amazed
by 3D printers, by the way.
>>VIRK: Right, and you can
print a model of a car.
Well, it turns out
they're now printing
scale models of the heart--
>>NOORY: And body parts.
>>VIRK: --and body parts using
actual cells from the person.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>VIRK: And so the further we go
down that path, the further we
realize that there is a blurring
between what is information
and what is a physical object.
If you remember in "Star Trek--
The Next Generation," Captain
Picard would go and say,
"Tea, Earl Grey, hot."
And it would render
the physical cup
and it would render the tea.
Those are two different
sets of atoms,
but they would be
rendered by one printer.
And so we are now
getting to the point
where we can have
different types of material
and to print them.
And within a decade
or two, we'll
be able to have replicators like
the "Star Trek" replicators.
>>NOORY: Are we
going too fast, Riz?
Are we going too fast
with this technology?
>>VIRK: Well, we're going
faster than we used to go.
But I do think that it's going
to take longer than people
assume for artificial
intelligence
to reach that critical point.
Everything else, I think,
is moving pretty fast,
whether it's the resolution.
If you watch special effects
on movies now, they blend in
and they look very realistic.
If you look at 3D
printers, you look
at augmented and
virtual reality,
things are moving
pretty quickly.
But that's just a part
of the information age
that we live in.
If we lived 100
years ago, you might
ask the same question about
are there too many machines?
Are these machines
being built too fast?
The telephone and the telegraph
and the radio, so much change
was going on.
In some ways, that was
an even bigger change
than what we're
going through today,
even though our advances
tend to come more quickly.
>>NOORY: The book,
"Simulated Multiverse."
>>VIRK: Yeah, so
that's the new book.
And the subtitle is "An MIT
Computer Scientist Explores
Parallel Universes, the
Simulation Hypothesis,
and the Mandela Effect."
And that'll be
ready in this fall.
And the idea there
is that you may
have people who remember events
differently than other people.
And that's what's become
popularly known as the Mandela
effect.
And so the idea of the new book
is that this might be evidence
that we are actually not
just in a simulated universe,
but in a simulated multiverse,
with many different timelines.
And time itself--
>>NOORY: And outcomes.
>>VIRK: What's that?
And outcomes.
>>NOORY: And outcomes.
>>VIRK: Exactly, which means
that there was a version of us,
there's a version of you
and that are maybe not
having this conversation here.
We're having it somewhere
else, but that there
are an infinite set
of possibilities.
And actually, quantum
physics tells us
that not only does
the observer effect
apply to something like a cat,
but it can apply to the past.
So if you think of light
coming from a galaxy that's
a million light years
away and there's
a black hole in
the middle that's
about 1,000 light
years away from us,
the light has to go to
the left or the right
of that black hole.
That decision has to have
been made 1,000 years ago,
because the black hole is
1,000 light years away.
>>NOORY: The secret is who's
the creator of the matrix?
>>VIRK: Well, that's
a big question, right?
And I think it's us.
Why do we play video games?
We play video games
to have experiences
that we can't have outside.
>>NOORY: To escape.
>>VIRK: To escape,
that's one reason.
I can't fly on a
dragon and shoot
at orcs in this
physical reality,
but I can do it in a video game.
Now, the question is, what
experiences can we have here
that perhaps our souls
can't have outside
of this simulated reality?
And the answer might be
physical experiences,
because if it's
pure consciousness
outside this reality, then
they can't have the suffering
that we're having here.
And so that's why the pain
and suffering may actually
be a key part of
this simulation,
as well as the ability to
make those choices that
might lead us down
the wrong path
or might lead us
down the right path.
>>NOORY: Amazing.
What's your website, Riz?
>>VIRK: So my website
is zenentrepreneur.com.
And from there, you can find
links to all of my books.
>>NOORY: Super.
Thanks for being
on "Beyond Belief."
>>VIRK: Absolutely.
Thanks for having me on.
I really enjoyed it.
>>NOORY: A lot of
experts say that we're
living in a simulated world.
If we are, what does
that mean to our future?
I'm George Noory.
And thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]